SOURCE: /Users/m.diluca@bham.ac.uk/Downloads/ismar26a-sub2109-i7.pdf
PAGES: 11
METADATA: {'/Author': '', '/CreationDate': 'D:20260317101735Z', '/Creator': 'LaTeX with hyperref', '/Keywords': '', '/ModDate': 'D:20260317101735Z', '/PTEX.Fullbanner': 'This is pdfTeX, Version 3.141592653-2.6-1.40.27 (TeX Live 2025) kpathsea version 6.4.1', '/Producer': 'pdfTeX-1.40.27', '/Subject': 'VGTC Conference Paper', '/Title': '', '/Trapped': '/False'}



===== PAGE 1 =====
Error-Related Eye Response: Error Detection and Confidence Support in
Upper Limb Virtual Reality Rehabilitation
Figure 1: (A) Upper limb rehabilitation action sequence illustrating rest, grasp initiation, and object placement. (B) Upper
limb virtual reality rehabilitation game. (C) Clinical experiment of upper limb VR rehabilitation game with ErrE strategy. (D)
User experiment overview. User Study 1 calibrates the ErrE statistical models and selects an analysis window using 40 healthy
participants, with 30 for calibration and 10 for window comparison. User Studies 2 and 3 evaluate real-time ErrE detection and
corrective feedback in healthy participants and in patients, respectively.
ABSTRACT
Interaction errors in upper-limb virtual reality (VR) rehabilitation,
such as unintended object selection or accidental drops, can dis-
rupt task flow, reduce perceived control, and undermine user con-
fidence. Existing systems usually detect such failures only after
they become behaviourally visible and often respond with coarse
correction that interrupts ongoing action. This research addresses
that gap by proposing ErrE, an Error-Related Eye Response frame-
work that combines real-time perceived-error detection with pre-
ventive, state-preserving corrective feedback. ErrE continuously
analyses blinks, gaze shifts, pupil-size change, and eye openness
within a sliding window using lightweight statistical models to in-
fer whether the user has perceived an interaction error. Three user
studies involving 70 healthy participants and 24 patients evaluated
the framework. Event-aligned analysis revealed a structured ocu-
lar signature around perceived errors, including pre-onset gaze in-
stability, blink activity, increased eye openness, and delayed pupil
dilation. In online use, ErrE achieved 96.11%–97.78% detection
accuracy in healthy participants and 97.22% in patients, with low
trigger latency. Enabling ErrE increased confidence from 75.28%
to 95.56% in healthy participants and from 61.81% to 83.85% in
patients, shortened trial completion time, and reduced error bur-
den in healthy participants. ErrE offers one of the first real-time,
eye-based error-awareness strategies for VR rehabilitation and pro-
vides an interpretable, clinically feasible path towards confidence-
oriented adaptive support.
Index Terms:Virtual reality, Physical therapy, Gaze pattern, Error
detection, User confidence
1 INTRODUCTION
Virtual Reality (VR) has become an increasingly powerful medium
for motor rehabilitation, offering interactive and repeatable environ-
ments that support goal-directed upper-limb training [1–4]. Within
such environments, patients can practise functional movements in
ecologically meaningful contexts while receiving rich sensory feed-
back, which can promote motivation and adherence to therapy [5,6].
Effective rehabilitation, however, also depends on measurable per-
formance and patients’ confidence during training [7–9]. In VR,
confidence may be undermined when the system responds in ways
that conflict with the patient’s intention, for example, through un-
intended object selection or object drops caused by tracking or ex-
ecution variability [10, 11]. When such errors are not recognised
and handled appropriately, patients may attribute failures either to
themselves or to an untrustworthy system, reducing engagement
and willingness to continue challenging tasks [12, 13]. At the same
time, corrective feedback must be carefully calibrated. Repeated
trial restarts or automatic success assignment despite incomplete
action may reduce perceived agency and weaken self-confidence by
making the system appear overly intrusive or unreliable [7, 9, 14].
Early error-awareness detection and minimally disruptive, state-
preserving correction are therefore important for preserving con-
fidence and supporting sustained practice in upper-limb VR reha-

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
bilitation [15].
Current VR rehabilitation systems typically detect errors indi-
rectly through behavioural outcomes such as task scores and com-
pletion time, through hand-motion thresholds, or through collision
and state rules defined by the application logic [16–18]. These
triggers often arise only after the failure has become a salient
event, for example, once an unintended selection has been com-
mitted or a drop has visibly begun, leaving limited opportunity for
state-preserving intervention. Although such approaches can cap-
ture some objective failures, they usually provide little insight into
whether the user actually perceived the event as an error [16, 19],
treat errors in a uniform manner without considering perceived er-
ror [20], and rely on coarse correction strategies such as restart-
ing a trial or reducing difficulty, which may interrupt training flow
[17, 21]. More advanced work in adaptive interfaces and brain-
computer interfaces suggests that error awareness can be inferred
from neurophysiological markers such as Error-Related Potentials
[22, 23]. However, electroencephalography equipment and signal-
processing pipelines remain burdensome for routine rehabilitation
deployment [22,24]. This leaves a clear research gap: a lightweight
method for detecting perceived errors early enough to support pre-
ventive real-time correction, with the specific aim of maintaining
user confidence. Eye tracking, now increasingly available in mod-
ern VR headsets [25], provides a practical opportunity to address
this gap because ocular and pupillometric responses, including gaze
shifts, blinks, eye openness, and pupil dynamics, can reflect rapid
reactions to unexpected outcomes [22, 23, 26, 27].
Motivated by the need to preserve confidence during upper-limb
VR rehabilitation, this research investigates whether perceived in-
teraction errors can be identified early enough from ocular and
pupillometric responses to support preventive correction [7, 9, 10].
Existing systems can identify some objective failures from task
logic and performance measures, yet they offer limited information
about whether the user has actually noticed the mismatch between
intention and outcome, that is, error awareness, and they often re-
spond with interventions that disrupt task flow [16, 18]. To address
this gap, this work proposes an Error-Related Eye Response (ErrE)
framework that uses ocular and pupillometric signals to infer per-
ceived errors in real time and to drive targeted, state-preserving cor-
rective feedback. The central premise is that these eye-response
patterns can provide an interpretable basis for early error detec-
tion, and that acting on this signal at the moment of emergence can
support confidence while preserving perceived control and avoid-
ing unnecessary interruption to training. This research evaluates
ErrE through a sequence of studies involving healthy participants
and patients undergoing upper-limb rehabilitation.
To address this aim, ErrE enables real-time perceived-error de-
tection and confidence-oriented corrective feedback in upper-limb
VR rehabilitation. Eye-tracking and interaction signals are cap-
tured continuously during gameplay, and a sliding window of ocular
and pupillometric features is analysed using interpretable statistical
models to infer whether the user has perceived an interaction error.
When error awareness is detected, the resulting ErrE decision drives
a closed-loop feedback mechanism that applies immediate, context-
appropriate correction while leaving successful actions untouched,
thereby aiming to support confidence while preserving perceived
control and maintaining task flow. ErrE is systematically evaluated
through three staged user studies: (i) model training and character-
isation of error responses in healthy participants, (ii) validation of
real-time error detection and corrective-feedback effects in a con-
trolled laboratory setting, and (iii) clinical testing with patients un-
dergoing upper-limb rehabilitation.
The key contributions of this research to VR rehabilitation and
human-computer interaction are as follows:
• This research is the first to introduce and systematically char-
acterise ErrE in immersive VR rehabilitation, showing that
perceived interaction errors can be detected from eye-tracking
signals without electroencephalography.
• This work demonstrates a closed-loop preventive correction
strategy driven by detected error awareness, providing evi-
dence that early, targeted intervention can support user con-
fidence while preserving perceived control during VR reha-
bilitation tasks.
• This research provides design and evaluation insights for in-
tegrating real-time, eye-based error detection and confidence-
oriented feedback into practical VR rehabilitation applica-
tions in clinical settings.
2 RELATEDWORK
2.1 Gaze Behaviour and Error Awareness in Rehabilita-
tion
Gaze behaviour provides an important window into the cognitive
and perceptual processes underlying interaction in virtual environ-
ments [12, 28, 29]. In rehabilitation, eye tracking is increasingly
used to examine where patients look, how they allocate attention
across task-relevant elements, and how visual exploration changes
during functional training [12, 30]. During upper-limb virtual real-
ity rehabilitation, gaze patterns over objects, targets, and feedback
displays can indicate whether patients are following instructions,
understanding task structure, and engaging with the training con-
tent [30–32]. Compared with performance metrics such as success
rates or completion times alone [17,19], gaze-based measures offer
a richer account of how patients experience the task and respond to
its demands [30, 33].
Beyond attention and engagement, gaze behaviour is also closely
linked to error processing during interaction [32, 34]. Across cog-
nitive psychology and human-computer interaction, unexpected
events and mismatches between intention and outcome have been
associated with characteristic ocular responses, including pupil di-
lation, transient eye widening, blink suppression, and corrective
saccades towards the source of the error [22,23,26,27]. Importantly,
these responses may emerge before the failure has fully unfolded,
suggesting a possible route towards preventive support rather than
delayed repair [22, 23, 26, 27]. In rehabilitation tasks, similar re-
sponses may occur when a patient selects the wrong object, drops
a target unexpectedly, or encounters feedback that conflicts with
the effort they believe they have made. Such eye-based signals
therefore offer a direct indication that the user has recognised that
something has gone wrong, even before confusion or frustration is
reported explicitly [23].
Despite this potential, the use of gaze behaviour to capture error
awareness in rehabilitation remains limited [1, 16]. Current virtual
reality rehabilitation systems mainly use eye tracking to study spa-
tial attention or to analyse visual behaviour retrospectively [30,32],
and rarely attempt to detect in real time when users have noticed an
interaction error [29, 31]. Errors are typically recorded as perfor-
mance failures, with little consideration of the accompanying per-
ceptual or emotional response [35, 36]. As a result, systems miss
the opportunity to respond at the moment when the user becomes
aware of an unexpected outcome. There is therefore a clear need for
methods that interpret gaze changes as markers of error awareness
and incorporate them into adaptive control, so that rehabilitation
systems can recognise user-perceived errors as they occur and re-
spond in ways that protect confidence and maintain continuity of
practice.
2.2 Adaptive Feedback and Confidence Restoration in
VR Rehabilitation
Adaptive feedback has become central to the design of virtual re-
ality rehabilitation systems, reflecting a broader move from fixed

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
exercise protocols towards responsive and personalised training en-
vironments [14, 37, 38]. In conventional therapy, clinicians con-
tinuously adjust instructions, task difficulty, and encouragement
in response to patient performance and emotional state in order
to maintain an appropriate level of challenge and support confi-
dence [7, 9, 10]. Virtual reality systems seek to emulate this pro-
cess by monitoring user behaviour and adapting feedback or task
parameters accordingly [8, 39]. In upper-limb rehabilitation, such
adaptation commonly includes changes to target position, move-
ment amplitude, or timing demands, together with visual, auditory,
or other sensory cues that signal success, highlight errors, or guide
correction [14, 33]. When designed well, adaptive feedback can
make rehabilitation feel more supportive, personalised, and clini-
cally meaningful [12, 14].
Recent work has shown that adaptive feedback can benefit both
performance and user experience [2, 3, 40]. Performance-driven
difficulty adjustment can help keep tasks within an effective chal-
lenge range, reducing boredom when tasks are too easy and discour-
agement when they are too demanding [41, 42]. State-contingent
feedback, for example, based on attention or fatigue, can sustain
engagement across longer sessions and promote more consistent
movement quality [8, 43]. Multimodal feedback, including visual,
auditory, haptic, and thermal cues, can further strengthen embodi-
ment and make corrective information feel more natural and intu-
itive [30, 44]. Within this broader context, feedback also plays an
important role in shaping users’ sense of competence, control, and
trust in the system [45,46]. Feedback that resolves confusing situa-
tions quickly and clearly may therefore be especially important for
preserving confidence when errors occur [7, 8].
However, current adaptive feedback strategies in virtual reality
rehabilitation rarely address directly how confidence should be sup-
ported when patients encounter an error or other unexpected out-
come [7,9]. In many systems, errors are treated primarily as perfor-
mance deficits to be penalised, ignored, or used to adjust later diffi-
culty, rather than as events that may disrupt trust in the system when
handled poorly [16,17,19]. Feedback after an error is often delayed,
generic, or restricted to negative signals such as score reduction or
trial failure, which may increase frustration and reduce willingness
to continue [5,47]. There remains a need for feedback mechanisms
that are sensitive to user-perceived errors and that respond in ways
that frame these events as manageable and understandable, thereby
protecting confidence during training [3, 48]. Integrating real-time
indicators of error awareness, such as gaze changes, into the feed-
back loop offers a promising direction. This would allow virtual
reality rehabilitation systems to detect when users recognise an er-
ror and to deliver immediate, supportive, preventive correction that
preserves continuity of action and reinforces the sense that the sys-
tem is reliable and supportive.
3 METHODOLOGY
3.1 ErrE Strategy
3.1.1 Closed Loop Overview
TheErrEstrategy implements a closed-loop mechanism that links
eye behaviour to targeted correction ofperceivedinteraction errors
during upper-limb VR rehabilitation. As shown in Figure 2, eye
tracking signals are processed continuously, converted into sliding-
window features, evaluated by three lightweight statistical models,
fused into a binary Error/Normal decision, and returned to the reha-
bilitation game to determine whether correction should be applied.
In this way, ErrE aims to detect perceived error awareness early
enough to support immediate, state-preserving correction with min-
imal disruption to the ongoing task. Detailed model definitions and
the online inference procedure are provided in Section 3.1.2 and
Algorithm 1.
Figure 2: System flowchart of the ErrE strategy
Eye tracking data:The rehabilitation game records eye track-
ing signals continuously during interaction. ErrE uses four signal
types: eye blinks, gaze movement, pupil size, and eye openness.
Task state is also available to the game engine for logging and for
selecting the appropriate correction after an ErrE Error decision has
been produced. Importantly, task state does not trigger ErrE in-
ference; detection operates continuously and independently of task
logic.
Sliding window feature extraction:ErrE maintains a sliding
window of lengthTms and updates at 10 Hz. At each update, the
most recent window is converted into a feature vector that sum-
marises the current eye response, including blink activity, gaze
movement, pupil change, and eye openness change. This provides
a compact, time-local representation suitable for low-latency online
inference.
Statistical models:The window-level feature vector is passed
to three lightweight statistical criteria. Each compares the cur-
rent window with class-specific reference patterns estimated from
labelled calibration data and outputs an error confidence score in
[0,1], denotedp Z,p MZ, andp IQR in Section 3.1.2. These models
are designed to remain interpretable and computationally efficient
for real-time use.
ErrE fusion and decision:The three confidence scores are
fused into a single confidence valuep ErrE, which is then thresh-
olded to produce a binary decision (Error or Normal) at 10 Hz. An
optional temporal consistency rule may be applied across consecu-
tive updates to suppress isolated false alarms. Fusion and threshold-
ing follow the procedures defined in Section 3.1.2 and implemented
in Algorithm 1.
System feedback:The binary ErrE decision is returned to the re-
habilitation game. When an Error decision is produced, the system
applies an immediate correction selected from the current interac-
tion state. In this task, correction includes restoring an object after a
drop or replacing an incorrectly grasped object with the instructed
target. When a Normal decision is produced, the task continues
unchanged. This design aims to preserve task flow, perceived con-
trol, and confidence by intervening only when an error-related eye
response indicates that the user has noticed an unexpected outcome.
3.1.2 Statistical Modelling
ErrE detects perceived interaction errors using three lightweight
statistical models applied to the same sliding-window eye feature
vectorf= [f 1, . . . ,fK]∈R K, updated at 10 Hz. Each model com-
pares the current window with class-specific reference statistics es-
timated from labelled calibration windows and outputs an error con-
fidence in[0,1], denotedp Z,p MZ, andp IQR. These three confi-
dences are then fused into a single scorepErrE, which is thresholded
to produce the binary ErrE decision used by the closed-loop system
(Algorithm 1 and Eq. (8)). TheErrorclass corresponds to windows
aligned to participant-perceived error instances, whereasNormal
corresponds to error-free interaction windows. A small constantε
is used to avoid division by zero.

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
Algorithm 1ErrE online error-related eye response detection and
correction (continuous inference)
1:Input:continuous eye tracking stream; current interaction state from the rehabil-
itation game
2:Output:ErrE decision at 10 Hz; context-appropriate corrective action when Er-
ror is detected
3:Initialisation
4:Load class statistics for Normal and Error windows for each model
5:Load model weightsw Z,w MZ,w IQR and decision thresholdτ
6:Set window lengthTms and update ratef=10 Hz
7:Online loop (runs continuously)
8:whiletask is activedo
9:extract most recent eye data window of lengthTms
10:compute featuresffrom blink, gaze, pupil, and eye openness
11:compute error confidencep Z using Z score
12:compute error confidencep MZ using Modified Z score
13:compute error confidencep IQR using IQR
14:fuse confidences:
15:p ErrE =w Z pZ +w MZ pMZ +w IQR pIQR
16:ifp ErrE >τthen
17:output ErrE decision = Error
18:identify the current error type using the interaction state
19:apply the corresponding corrective action in the rehabilitation game
20:else
21:output ErrE decision = Normal
22:continue the task without modification
23:end if
24:wait∆t=1/fseconds
25:end while
Z-score model (mean-based)The Z-score model measures
how far each feature deviates from the Normal and Error class
means relative to the corresponding standard deviations. Mean de-
viation to each class is first computed and then converted into an
error confidence, where a larger value indicates stronger similarity
to the Error class (Equations (1) and (2)):
DC
Z = 1
K
K
∑
k=1

fk −µ C
k
σC
k +ε
 ,C∈ {N,E},(1)
pZ = DN
Z
DN
Z +D E
Z +ε .(2)
Modified Z-score model (median-based)The Modified Z-
score model uses median and median absolute deviation (MAD)
to provide a more robust estimate under outliers or non-Gaussian
feature distributions. As above, the average deviation to each class
is converted into an error confidence (Equations (3) and (4)):
DC
MZ = 1
K
K
∑
k=1

0.6745(f k − ˜f C
k )
MADC
k +ε
 ,C∈ {N,E},(3)
pMZ = DN
MZ
DN
MZ +D E
MZ +ε .(4)
IQR-based model (range-based evidence)The IQR-based
model provides complementary range-based evidence using Tukey
bounds derived from the class quartiles. For each feature, the
current value is checked against the Normal and Error bounds.
Features that fall within the Error bounds but outside the Normal
bounds contribute to the Error countN E, whereas features that
fall within the Normal bounds but outside the Error bounds con-
tribute to the Normal countN N. The final confidence is then com-
puted from the relative amount of Error-supporting evidence (Equa-
tions (5) and (6)):
IC
k =Q C
3,k −Q C
1,k,C∈ {N,E},
LC
k =Q C
1,k −1.5I C
k ,U C
k =Q C
3,k +1.5I C
k .
(5)
pIQR = NE
NE +N N +ε .(6)
Fusion and decisionThe three confidences are combined us-
ing a weighted average. During calibration, each model is assigned
a reliability weight according to its balanced accuracy on a held-out
split of labelled windows. The fused confidence is then thresholded
atτto produce the final ErrE decision (Equations (7) and (8)):
wm = Sm
SZ +S MZ +S IQR
,m∈ {Z,MZ,IQR},(7)
pErrE =w Z pZ +w MZ pMZ +w IQR pIQR.(8)
3.1.3 Corrective Feedback Policy
ErrE uses a corrective feedback policy designed arounderror pre-
ventionas a real-time, state-preserving intervention. In upper-limb
VR rehabilitation, perceived interaction errors may reduce per-
ceived control and confidence [49]. The goal is therefore to in-
tervene when perceived error awareness emerges, before the failure
becomes a completed and salient event. ErrE uses the rapid ocular
“shock” response as an early signal that the mismatch between in-
tention and outcome has been recognised, even when the hand can
no longer correct the movement in time. By acting at this point, the
system aims to preserve action continuity and maintain confidence.
This emphasis ontimingdistinguishes ErrE from conventional
post hoc correction and coarse assistance. Post hoc correction acts
only after the failure has fully unfolded, while coarse strategies
such as trial restart or global undo may interrupt task flow and ap-
pear overly intrusive [7,9]. ErrE instead applies only minimal local
state adjustments, and only when an ErrEErrordecision is pro-
duced (Algorithm 1); otherwise, the task proceeds unchanged. In
this sense, the policy is preventive rather than reparative.
The rehabilitation game maintains an interaction state, includ-
ing the instructed target, grasp status, and release status, which
is queried only after anErrordecision is received. This keeps
the eye-based error-awareness trigger independent of task-specific
logic while allowing the system to select a context-appropriate cor-
rection.
Two representative error types were implemented.Wrong se-
lectionis treated as an action-selection error: if the user begins to
grasp the wrong object, the system substitutes the grasped item with
the instructed target so that the movement can continue without an
explicit re-attempt.Dropis treated as an execution slip: if the cor-
rect object is unintentionally released during transport, the system
restores it to the grasp state so that transport and placement can
continue. In both cases, the correction is applied at the earliest fea-
sible moment after perceived error awareness is detected, while the
action is still unfolding.
More broadly, the policy can be viewed as a small library of
correction primitives indexed by interaction state. This structure
can transfer to other VR rehabilitation tasks by redefining the task-
specific state variables and selecting local correction primitives that
preserve continuity of action. The intervention trigger remains the
same: an eye-derived indication of perceived error awareness that
can arise before the behavioural outcome is fully visible.
3.2 Rehabilitation Game Implementation
ErrE was evaluated in a seated upper-limb VR rehabilitation game
built around a repetitive reach–grasp–transport–place sequence
(Figure 1A). This movement pattern is commonly used in occu-
pational therapy because it trains shoulder and elbow control, fore-
arm rotation, and coordinated grasp and release within a functional
tabletop context [50,51]. A kitchen scene was used to preserve eco-
logical relevance while allowing precise control of task parameters
and interaction logging.
As shown in Figure 1B, the user sits at a virtual dining table with
a bowl within reach and a hotpot as the placement target. Each trial
begins with an instruction specifying the required meatball type.
The participant visually identifies the target item, reaches to the
bowl, grasps the meatball using a three-finger pinch supported by

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
the haptic glove, transports it across the table, and releases it into
the hotpot. This yields clear start and end states for each trial and
supports repeated practice with a stable movement structure.
The bowl contains three visually distinct meatball types (brown,
white, and green) placed in close proximity. This supports con-
trolled selection demands and creates natural opportunities for the
two error types targeted by ErrE: wrong selection and accidental
drop. ErrE operates continuously during gameplay by recording
eye behaviour, extracting sliding-window features, and issuing an
ErrororNormaldecision, while the game maintains the interaction
state required to apply the corresponding correction. In the healthy-
participant calibration study, task difficulty was further adjusted to
ensure that sufficient error instances were observed; this procedure
is described in Section 3.3.
3.3 User Experiments
Three sequential user studies evaluatedErrEin a staged manner,
progressing from model calibration to online validation and clinical
feasibility.User Study 1calibrated the statistical modelling core
of ErrE by characterising Error-Related Eye Responses, estimating
class-specific feature statistics and fusion weights, and selecting an
analysis window lengthTthat balances detection accuracy and la-
tency.User Study 2validated online error-awareness detection in
a new healthy cohort and then evaluated whether ErrE-driven cor-
rective feedback improves confidence and task continuity during
ongoing practice.User Study 3deployed ErrE in a rehabilitation
hospital to assess the feasibility and user experience with patients
under routine clinical constraints. In the healthy-participant stud-
ies, the task was performed with the non-dominant hand to elicit
sufficient natural errors, whereas patients performed the task with
the affected limb targeted for rehabilitation.
Shared setup.All studies used the same VR rehabilitation
game described in Section 3.2. Participants wore an HTC Vive Pro
Eye headset with built-in eye tracking and a Vive Tracker mounted
on the wrist, attached to a TouchDIVER G1 haptic glove. The game
was implemented in Unity 3D and ran on a workstation with an Intel
i9 central processing unit, 32GB RAM, and an RTX 3080 graph-
ics processing unit at a stable 90 Hz refresh rate. Eye tracking,
hand tracking, task events, model outputs, and system feedback
events were logged synchronously. Healthy participants used the
non-dominant hand to avoid ceiling performance and elicit suffi-
cient natural errors, whereas patients performed the task with the
rehabilitation target limb.
3.3.1 User Study 1: Calibration of Error-Related Eye Re-
sponse
User Study 1 (as presented in Figure 1D) established the calibration
foundation for ErrE. Its aims were to (i) characterise window-level
eye responses associated with perceived interaction errors in the
rehabilitation task, (ii) estimate class-specific feature statistics and
reliability weights for the three statistical criteria, and (iii) select
an analysis window lengthTthat balances discrimination perfor-
mance and detection latency. The study comprised a calibration
phase (Group A) for parameter estimation and a window-selection
phase (Group B) for comparing candidate values ofT.
Participants.A total of forty healthy adults (20 male, 20
female) participated in this study. Thirty participants (Group A)
(n=30;M age =37.20,SD=11.50) formed the calibration group
used to estimate Normal and Error statistics and model reliabil-
ity weights. The remaining ten participants (Group B) (n=10;
Mage =37.90,SD=11.09) formed the window-selection group,
who experienced different analysis window lengths and evaluated
perceived responsiveness and correctness. All participants reported
normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no history of neurologi-
cal or motor impairment. Familiarity with VR was recorded, with
82.50% reporting no prior experience, 15.00% reporting occasional
use, and 2.50% reporting regular use. Ethical approval was ob-
tained from the institutional review board, and written informed
consent was collected from all participants.
Procedure.Participants completed a briefing, eye and hand
calibration, and a short practice block. InGroup A, participants
then performed repeated instructed trials while task difficulty was
adaptively increased by reducing the size of the bowl and all three
meatballs by 10% after each successful trial. This increased selec-
tion and grasping demands so thatwrong selectionanddroperrors
arose naturally. Each session continued until at least three wrong
selection errors and three drop errors had been recorded, or un-
til fifteen minutes had elapsed. After each trial, the system logged
the interaction outcome, and participants reported whether they had
perceived an error. For offline calibration, sliding-window eye fea-
tures were aligned to logged grab and drop events, and samples
from[−500,1000]ms around event onset were labelled asError
only when the participant reported perceiving the error; all other
samples were treated asNormal. After calibration of class statis-
tics and fusion weights,Group Bcompleted the same task under
online ErrE configurations withT∈ {200,400,600,800,1000}ms
in Latin-square order. For eachT, trials continued until at least
one wrong selection error and one drop error had occurred. Grab
and drop timestamps were used to compute detection accuracy and
latency, after which participants rated perceived accuracy and re-
sponsiveness and ranked the candidate window lengths.
Measures.
•ErrE detection accuracy.For each candidate window length
T, accuracy was computed as the proportion of logged
grab and drop events for which ErrE agreed with the
participant-confirmed ground truth label, evaluated within
[−500,1000]ms relative to event onset. An event was con-
sidered detected ifp ErrE crossedτat least once within this in-
terval. Accuracy is reported overall and separately for wrong
selection and drop errors.
•ErrE detection latency.For each window lengthT, latency
was defined as the time from event onset (t 0) to the first
threshold crossing ofp ErrE within[−500,1000]ms. Thresh-
old crossings beforet 0 were treated as early detections and
reported as 0 ms latency.
•Eye response feature statistics.For each class and window
length, summary statistics were computed for eye blinks,
gaze movement, pupil-size change, and eye-openness change,
providing an objective description of Error-Related Eye Re-
sponses in this task. Full feature definitions and extraction
procedures are given in Appendix I.A.
•Preferred window length.Participants ranked the candidate
values ofTfrom most to least preferred, indicating which
configuration offered the best trade-off between perceived la-
tency and perceived accuracy.
3.3.2 User Study 2: Online Evaluation of Error Detection
and Corrective Feedback
User Study 2 (as presented in Figure 1D) provided an end-to-end
evaluation of ErrE under online operation in healthy participants.
The study had two aims: first, to quantify whether ErrE can de-
tect perceived error events reliably in real time during goal-directed
upper-limb practice; second, to test whether ErrE-driven correc-
tive feedback improves confidence and task continuity when nat-
ural interaction errors occur. A two-session within-subject design
was used. Session 1 assessed online detection with an alert-based
self-report ground truth, and Session 2 evaluated the same task with
closed-loop corrective feedback enabled, using the analysis window
lengths selected from User Study 1.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
Participants.A total of 30 healthy adults participated in this
study (15 male, 15 female;n=30;M age =36.70,SD=11.65).
All reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision and no history
of neurological, motor, or vestibular impairment that could af-
fect upper-limb function or tolerance to VR. VR familiarity was
recorded: 76.67% had no prior experience, and 23.33% had oc-
casional experience. Ethical approval was obtained, and written
informed consent was collected from all participants.
Procedure.Participants completed a briefing, calibration,
and short practice session. The study comprised two sessions within
the same visit, separated by a rest break. Three candidate analy-
sis window lengths, selected from User Study 1, were evaluated in
counterbalanced order using a Latin square. InSession 1 (detection
only), participants performed the task while ErrE operated online.
When ErrE indicated anError, an on-screen alert prompted the par-
ticipant to report whether they had perceived an error at that mo-
ment; this response served as the primary ground truth for detection
accuracy. To ensure sufficient error instances, the same progres-
sive size-reduction schedule as in User Study 1 was applied. Each
Tcondition continued until at least three wrong selection errors
and three drop errors had been observed, or until twenty minutes
had elapsed. InSession 2 (closed-loop correction), participants
repeated the same task under the sameTconditions and adaptive
difficulty schedule, but the alert prompt was replaced by the in-
tended corrective feedback. When an ErrEErrorwas detected, the
system applied the corresponding corrective action defined in Sec-
tion 3.1.3. EachTcondition was again continued until at least three
wrong selection errors and three drop errors had been observed, or
until twenty minutes had elapsed. After each condition, participants
completed brief ratings, and after all conditions, they completed the
full set of questionnaires.
Measures.
•ErrE detection accuracy.For each value ofTin Session 1,
accuracy was computed as agreement between ErrE and the
participant’s immediate self-report of perceived error, using
the same event-centred interval and event-level detection rule
as in User Study 1.
•ErrE detection latency.For each value ofTin both sessions,
latency was defined in the same way as in User Study 1,
namely from event onset to the first threshold crossing of
pErrE, with early detections reported as 0 ms.
•Task performance.Behavioural performance was quantified
using two per-trial indices: mean trial completion timeT trial
(seconds per trial) and error frequencyR err (errors per trial),
where errors include both wrong selections and drops. Full
definitions are given in Appendix I.B.
•Subjective outcomes.Confidence (Appendix II.A), usability
(Appendix II.B), engagement (Appendix II.C), and overall
user experience (Appendix II.D) were assessed after each ses-
sion to compare the alert-only setting (Session 1) against the
corrective-feedback setting (Session 2).
3.3.3 User Study 3: Clinical Feasibility and Impact of ErrE
User Study 3 (as presented in Figure 1D) examined the feasibility
and practical impact of ErrE when embedded within routine upper-
limb rehabilitation in a clinical setting (Figure 1C 1). Patients per-
formed the task with the affected limb targeted for rehabilitation,
and two short sessions compared baseline gameplay without auto-
matic correction against ErrE-enabled gameplay with closed-loop
corrective feedback. A single analysis window lengthT, selected
from User Study 2, was used for all patients.
Participants.A total ofn=24 patients undergoing upper-
limb rehabilitation were recruited through a local rehabilitation hos-
pital (Mage =48.88,SD=9.07; 15 male, 9 female). Inclusion cri-
teria were the ability to understand task instructions and to perform
seated reaching and grasping movements with the affected upper
limb targeted for rehabilitation. Exclusion criteria included medi-
cal contraindications to VR exposure, severe uncorrected visual im-
pairment, or conditions that could prevent safe participation. None
of the participants had prior VR experience. Diagnoses included
upper-limb trauma (n=22; examples shown in Figure 1C 2) and
stroke (n=2; an example shown in Figure 1C 3). All participants
provided informed consent, and the relevant clinical ethics com-
mittee approved the study. A therapist supervised each session to
ensure safety and comfort.
Procedure.The study was conducted in a quiet treatment
room in the rehabilitation hospital. Patients completed a brief-
ing, calibration, and short familiarisation period. Two short ses-
sions compared baseline gameplay without ErrE correction against
ErrE-enabled gameplay with closed-loop corrective feedback. In
theBaselinesession, no automatic correction was applied when an
error occurred. The ErrE pipeline ran in the background to log de-
tections and timing, but it did not alter task outcomes. In theErrE
Correctionsession, wrong selection events were corrected by re-
placing the grasped item with the instructed item, and drop events
were corrected by restoring the dropped item to the participant’s
grasp when ErrE was detected. Each session lasted three minutes
in line with therapist guidance regarding fatigue and safe training
duration, and session order was counterbalanced where feasible.
Short rest breaks were provided between sessions, and a therapist
remained present throughout.
Measures.The same objective and subjective measures as in
User Study 2 were collected, including ErrE detection correctness
and latency, behavioural task performance, and questionnaire-based
assessments of confidence, usability, engagement, and overall user
experience. In addition, the following clinician-rated measure was
collected:
•Clinician observation.A clinician completed a structured
observation form comparing patient performance and be-
havioural engagement in the rehabilitation game against typi-
cal conventional therapy across five clinical criteria. Full de-
tails are provided in Appendix II.E.
4 RESULTS
4.1 Eye Data: Event-aligned ocular signature around
perceived errors
Figure 3:Mean event-aligned ocular response around perceived
error onset.Time is aligned such that 0 ms denotes perceived er-
ror onset (vertical line). Shaded regions indicate blink intervals.
Eye openness and pupil diameter are shown as baseline-corrected
percentage change, and signed gaze shift is shown as a normalised
directional measure. Further details of the construction, normalisa-
tion, and interpretation of these traces are provided in Appendix I.C.

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
Figure 3 shows a structured ocular response around perceived error
onset. Before onset, the trace shows unstable gaze shifts together
with a blink interval and a marked change in eye openness. Af-
ter onset, pupil diameter increases more gradually and remains el-
evated, while a second blink interval appears in the mid post-error
phase. This temporal organisation suggests that perceived errors
are associated with a multi-stage eye response rather than a single
isolated change.
Importantly, identifiable changes in gaze dynamics and eye
openness were already present before the overt failure had fully
unfolded. This supports the use of pre-onset eye data for preventive
triggering in ErrE. Further details of the signal construction and in-
terpretation are provided in Appendix I.C.
4.2 User Study 1: Window Selection
User Study 1 examined the effect of analysis window length on de-
tection accuracy, latency, and participant preference. Detection ac-
curacy differed significantly across windows,F(4,36) =43.76,p<
0.001. The 200 ms window performed poorly (25.00%), whereas
400 ms and 600 ms reached 95.00%, and 800 ms and 1000 ms
reached 100.00% (Figure 4).
Latency also differed significantly across windows,F(4,36) =
106.01,p<0.001, increasing from 32.14 ms at 200 ms to 98.99 ms
at 1000 ms. Participant preference reflected the same trade-off:
400 ms was most preferred (mean rank=1.2), followed by 600 ms
(=1.8), whereas 1000 ms was least preferred (=4.8). Taken to-
gether, these results excluded 200 ms because of inadequate detec-
tion and 1000 ms because of excessive latency. The 400 ms, 600 ms,
and 800 ms windows were therefore retained for User Study 2, with
400 ms emerging as the most favourable balance between accuracy
and responsiveness.
4.3 User Study 2: Online Validation and Effectiveness
User Study 2 evaluated ErrE under online operation in healthy par-
ticipants. In Session 1, all three retained windows achieved near-
ceiling online detection accuracy, with no significant difference
across 400, 600, and 800 ms (F(2,58) =0.63,p=0.537). Mean
accuracies were 96.11%, 96.67%, and 97.78%, respectively. By
contrast, latency increased significantly with window length, from
40.15 ms at 400 ms to 71.59 ms at 800 ms (F(2,58) =145.64,p<
0.001), and participant preference again favoured 400 ms. These
findings confirmed 400 ms as the strongest setting for real-time use.
When ErrE correction was enabled in Session 2, task perfor-
mance improved. Averaged across windows, mean trial completion
time decreased from 3.90 s to 3.39 s,t(29) =4.28,p<0.001, and
mean error rate decreased from 17.13% to 14.46%,t(29) =9.44,
p<0.001 (Figure 4). More importantly, confidence increased
markedly from 75.28% to 95.56%,t(29) =6.49,p<0.001. En-
gagement and overall user experience also increased significantly,
whereas usability increased numerically but did not reach signifi-
cance (p=0.092). Overall, User Study 2 showed that ErrE could
detect perceived errors online with high accuracy and low latency,
while also providing a clear confidence benefit.
4.4 User Study 3: Clinical Feasibility
User Study 3 examined whether the 400 ms model remained ef-
fective in a clinical rehabilitation setting. Detection performance
remained strong. In the ErrE-enabled condition, mean detection
accuracy was 97.22% (SD=9.41%), and mean correction-trigger
Figure 4:Summary of ErrE outcomes across three user studies.Top row shows detection latency, trial completion time, and error rate.
Bottom row shows confidence, usability, engagement, and overall user experience. US1 denotes User Study 1, US2 denotes User Study 2,
and US3 denotes User Study 3. Numbers indicate the analysis window lengthT(ms).Ctrldenotes the baseline condition without ErrE, and
ErrEdenotes the ErrE-enabled condition. Boxplots show the participant distribution (centre line: median; box: interquartile range; whiskers:
range; ‘+’ indicates the mean).

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
latency was 41.62 ms (SD=6.01 ms), closely matching the healthy-
participant result at 400 ms (Figure 4).
The main behavioural effect in the patient group was improved
task efficiency. Mean trial completion time decreased from 11.57 s
to 9.22 s,t(23) =4.11,p<0.001. Error rate also decreased,
from 19.42% to 17.71%, though this change was not significant
(p=0.160). The clearest subjective effect was again confidence
support: confidence increased from 61.81% to 83.85%,p<0.001.
Usability, engagement, and overall user experience also improved,
and clinician observation scores were high (mean 96.88%). These
results indicate that ErrE retained high real-time detection perfor-
mance in the clinical setting and translated its main intended bene-
fit, namely, confidence-supportive corrective feedback, into patient-
facing rehabilitation.
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 Theoretical Implications of ErrE
5.1.1 Eye-Based Error Awareness in VR Rehabilitation
ErrE shifts rehabilitation error detection from completed task
failure towards perceived mismatch during interaction.Much
of the existing rehabilitation literature detects errors through task
outcomes, rule violations, collision events, or broad movement
thresholds, so system response usually begins only after failure has
become behaviourally visible [1, 15]. This frames error mainly as
an objective event in the task logic. ErrE instead focuses on the
moment when the user becomes aware that intention and outcome
have diverged. This is theoretically important because it places the
user’s perceptual and cognitive experience at the centre of rehabili-
tation interaction design. In this view, an error matters because the
user has recognised a mismatch and may then experience loss of
control, disruption, or reduced confidence [7, 8]. The present find-
ings therefore support a broader reframing in which rehabilitation
systems respond to awareness of failure rather than waiting for full
behavioural breakdown.
The event-aligned ocular patterns observed in this work sup-
port the use of eye behaviour as a lightweight marker of error
awareness in immersive rehabilitation.The reconstructed event
window revealed a structured response spanning pre-error and post-
error phases, including gaze instability before onset, a blink interval
shortly before onset, increased eye openness around onset, and de-
layed pupil dilation afterwards. This suggests that perceived errors
are reflected in temporally organised ocular dynamics rather than
in a single isolated feature. Importantly, part of the signal emerged
before the overt error had fully unfolded, supporting the use of pre-
onset eye data for preventive triggering. This interpretation is re-
inforced by the online results, where detection accuracy remained
near ceiling in User Study 2 and the 400 ms model maintained very
high accuracy with low latency in User Study 3. Together, these
findings indicate that eye tracking can provide a practical, real-time
window into perceived error awareness during VR rehabilitation.
5.1.2 Confidence as a Core Adaptive State in Rehabilitation
Design
ErrE suggests that confidence should be treated as a central
adaptive state in rehabilitation design rather than as a purely
post hoc subjective outcome.Many adaptive rehabilitation sys-
tems focus mainly on performance measures such as speed, move-
ment range, success rate, or difficulty level [14]. These variables
are important, though they do not fully capture how unexpected
interaction failures shape the user’s moment-to-moment interpreta-
tion of the task. In rehabilitation, especially for users with impaired
motor control, an interaction error may be interpreted as evidence
of inability, instability, or system unreliability. From this perspec-
tive, confidence is part of the interaction loop itself. It influences
whether users remain willing to continue, persist through difficulty,
and accept corrective assistance, while also being shaped by the
system’s behaviour [12]. ErrE therefore supports a broader view in
which confidence is a design-relevant state that can be monitored
and stabilised during ongoing therapeutic activity.
The present results support the view that early detection and
correction of perceived errors can help preserve confidence dur-
ing VR rehabilitation.In User Study 2, enabling ErrE was asso-
ciated with a substantial increase in confidence, from 75.28% to
95.56%, alongside improvements in engagement and overall user
experience. In User Study 3, the same pattern was observed in the
patient group, where confidence increased from 61.81% to 83.85%,
and clinician feedback described the corrective process as smooth
and reassuring. These findings suggest that confidence is closely
tied to how the system handles moments of mismatch, rather than
being determined only by overall task success. More broadly, ErrE
supports the argument that effective rehabilitation systems should
model how secure, in-control, and supported users feel while inter-
acting, because these moment-to-moment experiences shape will-
ingness to continue practice and trust the training process.
5.1.3 Preventive, State-Preserving Correction as a New
Feedback Logic
ErrE introduces a preventive and state-preserving correction
logic that differs from conventional post hoc assistance.Many
rehabilitation feedback mechanisms intervene only after the system
has registered a completed error, for example, through trial restart,
explicit warning, difficulty adjustment, or therapist-led interrup-
tion [2, 3]. These approaches can be useful, although they often
create a visible break in task continuity. ErrE advances a differ-
ent principle: corrective support is triggered when error awareness
emerges and while the task state is still recoverable. In this formula-
tion, assistance is designed to preserve continuity of action and re-
duce the salience of failure. The theoretical significance lies in the
timing of support. Correction becomes an interaction-timing prob-
lem in which effectiveness depends on entering the action stream
early enough to stabilise the intended trajectory.
The empirical results are consistent with the view that mini-
mal preventive correction can preserve agency more effectively
than more disruptive intervention styles.In healthy participants,
ErrE was associated with shorter trial completion time, lower er-
ror rate, and markedly higher confidence. In the patient study, the
clearest objective gain was reduced completion time, accompanied
by strong gains in confidence and user experience. At the same
time, real-time detection remained highly accurate and fast, espe-
cially with the 400 ms window. These patterns suggest that users
benefited from correction that was early, localised, and aligned with
their own emerging awareness of error. The conceptual contribu-
tion, therefore, extends beyond detection alone. ErrE proposes a
feedback logic in which effective support depends on timing, con-
tinuity, and fit with the user’s internal state, helping the system sta-
bilise action while preserving the user’s sense of authorship.
5.2 Practical Implications of ErrE
5.2.1 Supporting Confidence and Task Continuity During
Rehabilitation
ErrE offers a practical way to help users continue rehabilitation
tasks with fewer disruptive breakdowns.In upper-limb VR reha-
bilitation, wrong selections and accidental drops interrupt the action
sequence, fragment task rhythm, and often require additional recov-
ery effort. A system that can recognise the user’s awareness of such
failures and intervene immediately can reduce the need for repeated
attempts or externally imposed interruption. This is especially rele-
vant in repetitive task-oriented rehabilitation, where continuity and
pacing are important for sustaining motivation and reducing frus-
tration [5, 6]. In practical terms, ErrE helps keep the task centred
on practice and progression rather than on repeated recovery from
recoverable interaction problems.

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
The observed performance and subjective outcomes suggest
that confidence-supportive correction can make rehabilitation
feel smoother and more manageable.In User Study 2, ErrE
was associated with shorter trial completion time, lower error rate,
higher confidence, and stronger engagement and user experience.
In User Study 3, trial completion time again decreased, and thera-
pist feedback indicated that the corrective responses were fast and
smooth in practice. These results suggest that practical benefit may
arise through reducing disruption rather than through large changes
to task structure. In repeated upper-limb training, even small pre-
ventive corrections may accumulate into a more fluent and less
discouraging session. This is likely to matter in clinical routines
where many repetitions are needed and where maintaining confi-
dence across the session is as important as completing any single
trial successfully.
5.2.2 Lightweight Real-Time Error Detection for Clinical VR
Systems
ErrE is practically deployable because it relies on sensing and
computation that are already realistic for clinical VR systems.
The method uses eye tracking available in modern VR headsets and
lightweight statistical criteria rather than specialised physiological
hardware or computationally intensive pipelines [38]. This matters
in rehabilitation settings, where system complexity, setup burden,
and interpretability influence adoption outside the laboratory. A
practical clinical system should be easy to explain, straightforward
to operate, and transparent enough that therapists can understand
why it intervenes. ErrE aligns well with these constraints because
its feature basis and decision logic remain comparatively simple
and interpretable.
Its high accuracy and low latency indicate that this
lightweight design remains viable under real-time rehabilita-
tion demands.In User Study 2, detection accuracy remained
above 96% across the retained windows, while the 400 ms win-
dow achieved the most favourable balance between accuracy, la-
tency, and participant preference. In User Study 3, the same
400 ms setting maintained very high clinical accuracy together with
a mean correction-trigger latency of approximately 42 ms. These
results are practically important because they show that responsive
perceived-error detection can be achieved without EEG-style sens-
ing or opaque black-box inference. ErrE therefore provides a real-
istic route towards deployable eye-tracking-based adaptive support
in rehabilitation VR, particularly in settings where speed, clarity,
and ease of integration are important.
5.2.3 Assisting Therapists Through Early, Objective Error
Monitoring
ErrE provides therapists with a non-invasive and objective way
to notice when patients have perceived an interaction problem,
even when they do not explicitly verbalise it.In supervised reha-
bilitation, clinicians often infer difficulty, confusion, or hesitation
from movement quality, facial expression, or trial outcome. These
cues can be informative, although they may appear late or remain
ambiguous in immersive VR tasks. ErrE adds a complementary
signal by translating eye-based responses into an interpretable indi-
cator of likely error awareness. In practice, this may help therapists
recognise moments when the patient has noticed a problem even
before the action has fully broken down [2, 48]. Such support may
be especially useful when patients have limited confidence, incon-
sistent verbal feedback, or fluctuating motor performance.
The clinician observation results and therapist feedback sug-
gest that ErrE can support therapist judgement rather than re-
place it.Clinician observation scores were high, and therapist com-
ments emphasised the apparent accuracy, speed, and smoothness of
the corrective strategy. This suggests that ErrE may help therapists
intervene more efficiently, while reducing the need to infer inter-
action problems entirely from external observation. Importantly,
the system fits naturally into therapist-supervised rehabilitation be-
cause it does not remove the clinician from the loop. Instead, it con-
tributes an additional real-time cue that can support monitoring, in-
tervention timing, and patient reassurance. In this sense, ErrE func-
tions as an assistive layer for therapists rather than an autonomous
substitute for clinical judgement.
5.3 Limitations and Future Work
The main limitations of the present work relate primarily to the cur-
rent hardware implementation rather than to the underlying ErrE
logic. First, real-time performance depends on the quality of the
headset’s eye-tracking signal. In a small number of cases, some in-
dividuals could not be included because the eye tracker did not reli-
ably capture eye state, particularly when relatively small visible eye
apertures were misread as persistent eye closure. Second, although
the TouchDIVER G1 haptic glove and Vive Tracker enabled the
intended interaction design, the combined hardware remained rela-
tively heavy for some patients, especially those with stroke-related
weakness. These issues indicate that the main practical constraints
arose from sensing quality and wearable-device burden in the cur-
rent setup.
Future work should therefore strengthen the hardware founda-
tion of ErrE while broadening its rehabilitation validation. A direct
next step is to integrate more accurate eye-tracking hardware and
lighter wearable interaction equipment in order to improve signal
robustness and reduce motor burden. Longer-term patient stud-
ies will also be important for examining whether the confidence-
supportive and error-detection benefits of ErrE remain stable across
repeated use and whether they contribute to rehabilitation progress
over time. Finally, it will be valuable to evaluate ErrE in broader pa-
tient groups, wider clinical conditions, and other VR rehabilitation
tasks in order to test how broadly the same error-awareness-driven
correction logic transfers across rehabilitation contexts.
6 CONCLUSION
This research addressed a key challenge in upper-limb VR rehabil-
itation: interaction errors can disrupt task flow, reduce perceived
control, and undermine confidence, while existing systems usually
respond only after failure has become behaviourally visible. To ad-
dress this gap, this research proposed ErrE, an Error-Related Eye
Response framework that detects perceived interaction errors from
real-time eye behaviour and uses that signal to drive immediate,
state-preserving corrective support. Across three staged user stud-
ies, ErrE showed that perceived errors are associated with a struc-
tured ocular signature, that this signal can be detected online with
high accuracy and low latency, and that the resulting feedback can
be integrated into rehabilitation without disrupting successful ac-
tions. In healthy participants, ErrE achieved 96.11%–97.78% de-
tection accuracy and increased confidence from 75.28% to 95.56%.
In patients, the selected 400 ms model achieved 97.22% detection
accuracy with a mean trigger latency of 41.62 ms and increased
confidence from 61.81% to 83.85%, while also shortening task
completion time. Taken together, these findings establish ErrE as
an interpretable and clinically promising framework for combining
real-time error detection with confidence-oriented adaptive support
in upper-limb VR rehabilitation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The ethical approvals for this research were obtained from the au-
thors’ University Research Ethic Review Panel for healthy partici-
pants and from the Ethics Committee of Hospital for patients.

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
REFERENCES
[1] J. Zhang, M. Liu, J. Yue, J. Yang, Y . Xiao, J. Yang, and E. Cai. Effects
of virtual reality with different modalities on upper limb recovery: A
systematic review and network meta-analysis on optimizing stroke re-
habilitation.Frontiers in Neurology, 16:1544135, Apr. 2025. doi: 10.
3389/fneur.2025.1544135 1, 2, 8
[2] P. Tang, Y . Cao, D. T. A. V . Vithran, W. Xiao, T. Wen, S. Liu, and Y . Li.
The efficacy of virtual reality on the rehabilitation of musculoskeletal
diseases: Umbrella review.Journal of Medical Internet Research,
27:e64576, Apr. 2025. doi: 10.2196/64576 1, 3, 8, 9
[3] C. D. Kenea, T. G. Abessa, D. Lamba, and B. Bonnech `ere. Immersive
virtual reality in stroke rehabilitation: A systematic review and meta-
analysis of its efficacy in upper limb recovery.Journal of Clinical
Medicine, 14(6):1783, Mar. 2025. doi: 10.3390/jcm14061783 1, 3, 8
[4] L. Wang, M. Huang, R. Yang, H.-N. Liang, J. Han, and Y . Sun. Survey
of movement reproduction in immersive virtual rehabilitation.IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 29(4):2184–
2202, Apr. 2023. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2022.3142198 1
[5] C. Zhang, S. Yu, and J. Ji. CFI: A VR motor rehabilitation serious
game design framework integrating rehabilitation function and game
design principles with an upper limb case.Journal of NeuroEngineer-
ing and Rehabilitation, 21(1):113, July 2024. doi: 10.1186/s12984
-024-01373-2 1, 3, 8
[6] C. Zhang and S. Yu. Technology to enhance patient motivation in
virtual reality rehabilitation: A review.Games for Health Journal,
13(4):215–233, Aug. 2024. doi: 10.1089/g4h.2023.0069 1, 8
[7] W. Zhu, Q. Yang, B. Zhang, C. Wang, and C. Fan. Associations
between self-efficacy and health-related quality of life in haemor-
rhagic stroke survivors: A longitudinal study.BMC Public Health,
25(1):1716, May 2025. doi: 10.1186/s12889-025-22655-x 1, 2, 3, 4,
8
[8] X. Jiang, Q. Sun, R. Tang, S. Liu, X. Chen, and Y . Lv. Self-efficacy
and implementation intentions in home rehabilitation of stroke pa-
tients: The parallel mediating role of recurrence risk perception and
outcome expectations.Frontiers in Psychology, 16:1656514, Sept.
2025. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1656514 1, 3, 8
[9] B. Darcy, L. Rashford, D. Huizenga, K. B. Reed, and S. J. M. Bam-
berg. Balance improvement and fall risk reduction in stroke survivors
after treatment with a wearable home-use gait device: Single-arm lon-
gitudinal study with 1-year follow-up.JMIR Formative Research,
9:e67297–e67297, Aug. 2025. doi: 10.2196/67297 1, 2, 3, 4
[10] S. S. AlFraih, E. Patchwood, and P. Conroy. A scoping review
of therapies targeting confidence in stroke survivors.Aphasiology,
39(2):214–237, Feb. 2025. doi: 10.1080/02687038.2024.2340804 1,
2, 3
[11] Q. Wang, S. Hunter, R. L.-T. Lee, X. Wang, and S. W.-C. Chan. Mo-
bile rehabilitation support versus usual care in patients after total hip
or knee arthroplasty: Study protocol for a randomised controlled trial.
Trials, 23(1):553, Dec. 2022. doi: 10.1186/s13063-022-06269-x 1
[12] K.-L. Liao, M. Huang, J. Shi, M. Chen, and R. Yang. ZonAware:
Identifying zoning out and increasing engagement in upper limb vir-
tual reality rehabilitation.IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 31(11):10120–10130, Nov. 2025. doi: 10.1109/
TVCG.2025.3616818 1, 2, 3, 8
[13] L. Wang, M. Huang, Y . Zheng, J. Wei, and R. Yang. Weight percep-
tion and controlling experience in loaded virtual rehabilitation: Effect
of biased weight feedback and modulated movement. In2023 IEEE
11th International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for
Health (SeGAH), pp. 1–7. IEEE, Athens, Greece, Aug. 2023. doi: 10.
1109/SeGAH57547.2023.10253794 1
[14] D. J. Palidis, Z. Gardiner, A. Stephenson, K. Zhang, J. Boruff, and
L. K. Fellows. The use of extrinsic performance feedback and reward
to enhance upper limb motor behavior and recovery post-stroke: A
scoping review.Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 39(2):157–
173, Feb. 2025. doi: 10.1177/15459683241298262 1, 3, 8
[15] R. Villarroel, B. R. Garc ´ıa-Ramos, J. L. Gonz ´alez-Mora, and
C. Modro ˜no. Virtual reality therapy for upper limb motor impair-
ments in patients with stroke: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Physiotherapy Research International, 30(2):e70040, Apr. 2025. doi:
10.1002/pri.70040 2, 8
[16] G. Nicora, S. Pe, G. Santangelo, L. Billeci, I. G. Aprile, M. German-
otta, R. Bellazzi, E. Parimbelli, and S. Quaglini. Systematic review
of AI/ML applications in multi-domain robotic rehabilitation: Trends,
gaps, and future directions.Journal of NeuroEngineering and Reha-
bilitation, 22(1):79, Apr. 2025. doi: 10.1186/s12984-025-01605-z 2,
3
[17] X. Wang, J. Zhang, S. Q. Xie, C. Shi, J. Li, and Z.-Q. Zhang. Quan-
titative upper limb impairment assessment for stroke rehabilitation: A
review.IEEE Sensors Journal, 24(6):7432–7447, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.
1109/JSEN.2024.3359811 2, 3
[18] T. Peng. Quantitative assessment of human motion for health and
rehabilitation: A novel fuzzy comprehensive evaluation approach.
SLAS Technology, 29(5):100181, Oct. 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.slast.2024
.100181 2
[19] D. Ekambaram and V . Ponnusamy. Real-time AI-assisted visual exer-
cise pose correctness during rehabilitation training for musculoskele-
tal disorder.Journal of Real-Time Image Processing, 21(1):2, Feb.
2024. doi: 10.1007/s11554-023-01385-6 2, 3
[20] R. Maskeli ¯unas, R. Dama ˇseviˇcius, T. Bla ˇzauskas, C. Canbulut,
A. Adomaviˇcien˙e, and J. Gri ˇskeviˇcius. BiomacVR: A virtual reality-
based system for precise human posture and motion analysis in reha-
bilitation exercises using depth sensors.Electronics, 12(2):339, Jan.
2023. doi: 10.3390/electronics12020339 2
[21] K. Marek, J. Redlicka, E. Miller, and I. Zubrycki. Objectivizing
measures of post-stroke hand rehabilitation through multi-disciplinary
scales.Journal of Clinical Medicine, 12(23):7497, Dec. 2023. doi: 10
.3390/jcm12237497 2
[22] S. LoTemplio, J. Silcox, D. L. Strayer, and B. R. Payne. Single-trial
relationships between the error-related negativity, pe, error-related
pupillary dilation response, and post-error behavior.Psychophysiol-
ogy, 63(1):e70216, Jan. 2026. doi: 10.1111/psyp.70216 2
[23] H. Lee, N. Jiang, and S. Samuel. Detection of error in static
and dynamic visual stimulation via electroencephalogram and eye-
tracking systems.Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence,
159:111688, Nov. 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2025.111688 2
[24] L. Wang, M. Huang, R. Yang, C. Qin, J. Han, and H.-N. Liang. Ef-
fect of reaching movement modulation on experience of control in
virtual reality.International Journal of Human–Computer Interac-
tion, 40(21):6740–6757, Nov. 2024. doi: 10.1080/10447318.2023.
2290382 2
[25] R. N. Todd, J. Gong, A. C. Banic, and Q. Zhu. Validating the per-
formance of VR headset eye-tracking using gold standard eye-tracker
and MoCap system.Information, 17(2):143, Feb. 2026. doi: 10.3390/
info17020143 2
[26] L. Pfalz, C. M ¨uller, and K. Kopiske. Can pupillometry reveal pertur-
bation detection in sensorimotor adaptation during grasping?Journal
of Neurophysiology, 134(5):1804–1817, Nov. 2025. doi: 10.1152/jn.
00259.2025 2
[27] R. Jordan. The locus coeruleus as a global model failure system.
Trends in Neurosciences, 47(2):92–105, Feb. 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.
tins.2023.11.006 2
[28] M. Sugianto, Y . Zhou, and J. Qiu. Eye tracking-based dual task in
rehabilitation of motor and cognitive function in post-stroke patients:
A literature review.Bulletin of Faculty of Physical Therapy, 30(1):33,
May 2025. doi: 10.1186/s43161-025-00295-x 2
[29] M. Maldonado-D ´ıaz, G. Jara-Vargas, and F. Gonz´alez-Seguel. Visual
attention during non-immersive virtual reality balance training in older
adults with mild to moderate cognitive impairment: An eye-tracking
study.Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 17:1671477, Oct. 2025. doi:
10.3389/fnagi.2025.1671477 2
[30] J. Zhang, M. Huang, Y . Chen, K.-L. Liao, J. Shi, H.-N. Liang, and
R. Yang.TouchMark: Partial tactile feedback design for upper
limb rehabilitation in virtual reality.IEEE Transactions on Visual-
ization and Computer Graphics, 30(11):7430–7440, Nov. 2024. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2024.3456173 2, 3
[31] P. Diotaiuti, G. Marotta, F. Di Siena, S. Vitiello, F. Di Prinzio, A. Ro-
dio, T. Di Libero, L. Falese, and S. Mancone. Eye tracking in
parkinson’s disease: A review of oculomotor markers and clinical
applications.Brain Sciences, 15(4):362, Mar. 2025. doi: 10.3390/

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
brainsci15040362 2
[32] M. Tahri Sqalli, B. Aslonov, M. Gafurov, N. Mukhammadiev, and
Y . Sqalli Houssaini. Eye tracking technology in medical practice: A
perspective on its diverse applications.Frontiers in Medical Technol-
ogy, 5:1253001, Nov. 2023. doi: 10.3389/fmedt.2023.1253001 2
[33] K.-L. Liao, M. Huang, J. Shi, M. Chen, and R. Yang. Focus-driven
augmented feedback: Enhancing focus and maintaining engagement
in upper limb virtual reality rehabilitation.IEEE Transactions on Visu-
alization and Computer Graphics, 31(5):2653–2663, May 2025. doi:
10.1109/TVCG.2025.3549543 2, 3
[34] A. Ionescu, E. S , tef˘anescu, S, . Strilciuc, A. Rafila, and D. Mures ,anu.
Correlating eye-tracking fixation metrics and neuropsychological as-
sessment after ischemic stroke.Medicina, 59(8):1361, July 2023. doi:
10.3390/medicina59081361 2
[35] P. W. Jordan, B. Thomas, I. L. McClelland, and B. Weerdmeester.
Usability Evaluation in Industry. CRC press, 1996. 2
[36] S. H. Lee, H.-Y . Jung, S. J. Yun, B.-M. Oh, and H. G. Seo. Upper
extremity rehabilitation using fully immersive virtual reality games
with a head mount display: A feasibility study.PM&R, 12(3):257–
262, Mar. 2020. doi: 10.1002/pmrj.12206 2
[37] I. Miltiadis, A. Skarlis, and P. Burko. The role of virtual reality in
personalized medicine: Advancing prediction, prevention, and partic-
ipation.Journal of Medical Systems, 49(1):56, Apr. 2025. doi: 10.
1007/s10916-025-02191-2 3
[38] I. Figueiredo, B. Marques, S. Oliveira, B. Guerreiro, S. Silva,
P. Amorim, T. Ara´ujo, L. V . Costa, C. Ferreira, P. Dias, and B. S. San-
tos. Personalized eXtended reality experiences to enhance the rehabil-
itation process of stroke survivors: A scoping review.Computers &
Graphics, 133:104411, Dec. 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.cag.2025.104411
3, 9
[39] A. Lu, M. Huang, K.-L. Liao, Z. Chen, and R. Yang. Crafting Us-
ability in Neuro-Narrative Games: The Joint Influence of Imagery
Perspectives and Task Sequences in BCI–VR System.IEEE Trans-
actions on Games, 17(4):1112–1124, Dec. 2025. doi: 10.1109/TG.
2025.3615465 3
[40] K. Brock, S. J. Vine, J. M. Ross, M. Trevarthen, and D. J. Harris.
Movement kinematic and postural control differences when perform-
ing a visuomotor skill in real and virtual environments.Experimental
Brain Research, 241(7):1797–1810, July 2023. doi: 10.1007/s00221
-023-06639-0 3
[41] S. Guo, L. Li, H. Liu, S. Wu, Y . Zheng, and J. Niu. Bimanual
asymmetric coordination in a three-dimensional zooming task based
on leap motion: Implications for upper limb rehabilitation.Inter-
national Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 40(8):1931–1942,
Apr. 2024. doi: 10.1080/10447318.2023.2242728 3
[42] O. S. Ajani and R. Mallipeddi. Pareto-based dynamic difficulty adjust-
ment of a competitive exergame for arm rehabilitation.International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 178:103100, Oct. 2023. doi: 10
.1016/j.ijhcs.2023.103100 3
[43] J. Zhao, G. Zhang, and D. Xu. The effect of reward on motor learning:
Different stage, different effect.Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
18:1381935, Mar. 2024. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2024.1381935 3
[44] S. P. Maddumage Dona, P. B. Chand, C. Haden, N. Kalyani, A. Lehn,
K. Sullivan, and G. K. Kerr. Effectiveness of haptic cues on gait
in people with parkinson’s disease – a systematic review and meta-
analysis.Gait & Posture, 122:358–374, Oct. 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.
gaitpost.2025.08.069 3
[45] P. Amorim. Virtual reality in chronic pain rehabilitation: A systematic
review.Journal of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 7(1):14–78,
2025. 3
[46] W. Quan, S. Liu, M. Cao, and J. Zhao. A comprehensive review of
virtual reality technology for cognitive rehabilitation in patients with
neurological conditions.Applied Sciences, 14(14):6285, July 2024.
doi: 10.3390/app14146285 3
[47] S. Krishnan, M. A. Mandala, S. L. Wolf, A. Howard, and T. M. Kesar.
Perceptions of stroke survivors regarding factors affecting adoption of
technology and exergames for rehabilitation.PM&R, 15(11):1403–
1410, Nov. 2023. doi: 10.1002/pmrj.12963 3
[48] K. E. Laver, B. Lange, S. George, J. E. Deutsch, G. Saposnik,
M. Chapman, and M. Crotty. Virtual reality for stroke rehabilitation.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2025(6), June 2025. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD008349.pub5 3, 9
[49] M. Gustavsson, E. K. Kj ¨ork, M. Erhardsson, and M. Alt Murphy. Vir-
tual reality gaming in rehabilitation after stroke – user experiences and
perceptions.Disability and Rehabilitation, 44(22):6759–6765, Oct.
2022. doi: 10.1080/09638288.2021.1972351 4
[50] A. Turton, P. Cunningham, F. Van Wijck, H. Smartt, C. Rogers,
C. Sackley, S. Jowett, S. Wolf, K. Wheatley, and P. Van Vliet. Home-
based reach-to-grasp training for people after stroke is feasible: A
pilot randomised controlled trial.Clinical Rehabilitation, 31(7):891–
903, July 2017. doi: 10.1177/0269215516661751 4
[51] F. Grimm, G. Naros, and A. Gharabaghi. Closed-loop task difficulty
adaptation during virtual reality reach-to-grasp training assisted with
an exoskeleton for stroke rehabilitation.Frontiers in Neuroscience,
10, Nov. 2016. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2016.00518 4